<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Tobacco and the Devil</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="tobacco-and-the-devil" epub:type="se:short-story">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Tobacco and the Devil</h2>
			<p>Tobacco did not grow in Japan in the beginning. And the records do not agree as to when it was introduced. Some put it in the Keichō Period (1596⁠–⁠1615) and some in the Tembun Period (1532⁠–⁠55). But the plant seems to have been already widely under cultivation by about the tenth year of Keichō. And in the Bunroku Period (1592⁠–⁠96), smoking was so widespread as to give rise to the pasquinade,</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span class="i2">Things without effect</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On men are the smoking law,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The counterfeit law,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The imperial voice secluded</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Gentaku the physician.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>To the question, “By whom was tobacco introduced?” any historian would answer that it was by the Portuguese or the Spaniards. But these are not necessarily the only answers. There is, besides, one more in the form of a tradition. According to it, tobacco was brought here from somewhere by the Devil. And the Devil was brought all the way over to Japan by a Catholic Padre, perhaps <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">St.</abbr> Francis.</p>
			<p>When I say this, Catholic believers may find fault with me for slandering their Padres. But for myself, I cannot but believe it probable. For it is most natural that when the god of the “Southern barbarians” came to us from across the sea, their devil should come with him⁠—that is, when the good of the West was brought in, the evil should be brought in too.</p>
			<p>But I cannot say positively whether the Devil truly brought tobacco to this land or not. Of course, according to a book by Anatole France, the Devil once tried to tempt a certain priest with mignonette. Then surely we cannot simply say that the story that he brought tobacco into Japan is a mere lie. Even if it is a lie, it may be, in a certain sense, surprisingly near the truth. With this thought, I have decided to try writing here this tradition concerning the introduction of tobacco.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>In the eighteenth year of Tembun, the Devil, assuming the form of a Brother in <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">St.</abbr> Francis Xavier’s company, came safely across the wide seas to Japan. He was able to change himself into this Brother because, while the genuine Brother was ashore at Amakawa or somewhere, the “black ship” which carried the party sailed away and left him behind without knowing it. Then the Devil, who had up to this time been hanging head down with his tail wrapped round a spar secretly watching what was going on in the ship, instantly took on the appearance of this man and began to wait on <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">St.</abbr> Francis constantly. Of course such a trick was nothing for him, since he was the expert who, when he called on <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Faust, could assume the shape of a splendid red-cloaked knight.</p>
			<p>But when he reached Japan, he found things quite different from what he had read of them in Marco Polo’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Travels</i> while still in the West. In the first place, in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Travels</i>, the whole country seemed to be overflowing with gold, but look where he might, there was nothing of the kind to be seen. Then he might be able to tempt people a good deal by scratching crosses with his nail and turning them into gold. And it was said that the Japanese knew a way of raising the dead by the power of pearls or something, but this also seemed to be one of Marco Polo’s lies. If it was a lie and he should spit into all their wells and spread a plague among them, practically all men would forget the coming Paradise in their agony. Laudably following <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">St.</abbr> Francis about here and there sightseeing, the Devil secretly thought such thoughts and smiled to himself with satisfaction.</p>
			<p>But there was one thing that troubled him. Even he did not know what to do about that one thing. Francis Xavier having just reached Japan and it being necessary for him to preach widely before he could make any converts to Christianity, there was not a single all-important believer for him to tempt. With all his being the Devil, this perplexed him not a little. In the first place, for the time being, he did not know how to while away his tedious leisure hours.</p>
			<p>So after considering many things, he thought he would kill some time gardening anyway, for he had been carrying various kinds of seeds in the hollow of his ear ever since his departure from the West. As for land, if he borrowed a neighboring field, he would have no trouble about that. Moreover, even <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">St.</abbr> Francis gave his hearty approval. Of course he supposed that one of the Brothers in his company was going to introduce western medicinal herbs or some such plants into Japan.</p>
			<p>The Devil immediately borrowed a spade and a hoe and began energetically to till a roadside field.</p>
			<p>It was just at the vapor-laden beginning of spring, and the bell of a far-off temple sent its sleepy boom through the floating mist. The sound was ever so tranquil and did not strike him on the crown of the head with the disagreeable sharp clang of the church bells of the West to which he was accustomed. But if you suppose that the Devil felt calm in these peaceful surroundings, you are quite wrong.</p>
			<p>When he once heard the sound of this temple bell, he scowled more unhappily than he had when he heard the bell of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">St.</abbr> Paul’s and began to dig furiously in the field. For when, bathed in the warm sunshine, he heard this calm bell, his heart was strangely relaxed. He had no more mind to work evil than to do good. At this rate, his crossing the sea on purpose to tempt the Japanese would be all in vain. The only reason the Devil, who hated work so much that he was once scolded by the sister of Ivan for having no blisters on his palms, was willing to toil away with a hoe like this was simply that he was madly determined to drive away the moral sleepiness that threatened to overcome him.</p>
			<p>After some days the Devil at last finished his work and sowed in furrows the seeds he had in his ear.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>During the following months, the seeds the Devil had sown sprouted and grew into high plants and, at the end of the summer, broad green leaves completely hid all the earth of the field. But there was no one who knew the name of the plants. Even when <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">St.</abbr> Francis asked him, the Devil only grinned and held his tongue, vouchsafing no reply.</p>
			<p>Meanwhile the plants put out clusters of flowers on the ends of their stems. They were funnel-shaped and light purple. The Devil seemed to be delighted with the flowering of the plants in proportion to the trouble he had taken with them. So every day, after the morning and evening services, he always came out into the field and cultivated them devotedly.</p>
			<p>Then one day (<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">St.</abbr> Francis had gone off on a preaching tour for several days and was absent) a cattle dealer passed by the field leading a yellow cow. There across the fence in the field full of purple flowers stood a southern barbarian Brother in his black priest’s robe and broad-brimmed hat busily picking worms off the leaves. The flowers were so curious that the cattle dealer involuntarily stopped, took off his mushroom hat and called to the Brother politely,</p>
			<p>“I say, holy one, what are those flowers?”</p>
			<p>The Brother looked round. He had a flat nose and small eyes and was an altogether good-natured looking “redhead.”</p>
			<p>“These?”</p>
			<p>“Yes.”</p>
			<p>The “redhead,” leaning on the fence, shook his head. Then he said in awkward Japanese,</p>
			<p>“I’m sorry, but I can’t tell that one thing to anybody.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, then did Francis-<span epub:type="z3998:name-title">sama</span> say that you shouldn’t tell?”</p>
			<p>“No, not that.”</p>
			<p>“Then won’t you just tell me once, for I’ve recently been instructed by Francis-<span epub:type="z3998:name-title">sama</span> and become a believer in your religion, as you see.”</p>
			<p>The cattle dealer pointed proudly to his breast. The Devil looked, and sure enough, there was a little brass cross hanging from his neck and shining in the sun. Then, perhaps dazzled by it, the Brother screwed up his face a little and dropped his eyes to the ground, but quickly in a more familiar tone than before and so that you could not tell whether he was joking or not, he said,</p>
			<p>“Still I can’t. For by the law of our country, it’s forbidden to tell. Better still, you make a guess at it yourself. The Japanese are clever, so you’re sure to hit it. If you do, I’ll give you all the plants in this field.”</p>
			<p>The cattle dealer probably thought the Brother was making fun of him. With a smile on his sunburnt face, he gave his head an exaggerated tilt.</p>
			<p>“What can it be, I wonder. To save me, I can’t guess it right off.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, you needn’t do it today. Think it over for three days. I don’t care if you consult others about it. If you guess it, I’ll give you all these. Besides, I’ll give you some rare wine. Or shall I give you a picture of the Heavenly Paradise.”</p>
			<p>The cattle dealer seemed to be surprised at his earnestness.</p>
			<p>“Then if I don’t guess it, what’ll I have to do?”</p>
			<p>Pushing his hat back on his head, the Brother waved his hand and laughed. He laughed in a sharp voice like a crow’s, that took the cattle dealer a little by surprise.</p>
			<p>“If you fail to guess it, I’ll take something of yours. It’s a gamble. It’s a gamble whether you can guess it or not. If you guess it, I give you all these plants.”</p>
			<p>As he talked, the redhead’s voice again took on a friendly tone.</p>
			<p>“All right. Then I’ll do my best, too, and give you anything you say.”</p>
			<p>“Will you give me anything? Even that cow?”</p>
			<p>“If she’ll do, I’ll give her to you right now.”</p>
			<p>Smiling, the cattle dealer patted the yellow cow on the forehead. He seemed to be taking everything the good-natured Brother said for a joke.</p>
			<p>“And in exchange, if I win, I’ll thank you for those flowering plants.”</p>
			<p>“Good. Good. Then it’s a real bargain, isn’t it?”</p>
			<p>“It’s a real bargain. I swear in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ.”</p>
			<p>When he heard this, the Brother flashed his little eyes and snorted twice or thrice as if with satisfaction. Then putting his left hand on his hip and leaning a little back, he put his right hand out and touched the purple flowers.</p>
			<p>“Well then, if you don’t guess it⁠—I’ll take you, body and soul.”</p>
			<p>With this, the redhead made a large circle with his right hand and took off his hat. There were two horns like a goat’s in his shaggy hair. The cattle dealer, changing color, dropped his hat from his hand. Perhaps because the sun was obscured, the brightness of the flowers and leaves in the field all at once vanished. Even the cow, as if in fear of something, lowered her horns and gave a bellow like the rumbling of the earth.</p>
			<p>“Even a promise made to me is a promise. You’ve sworn in the name of one to me unmentionable. Don’t forget. You have three days. Goodbye.”</p>
			<p>Speaking thus in the courteous tone of one who has made a fool of somebody, the Devil deliberately made the cattle dealer a very polite bow.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>The cattle dealer regretted that he had fallen into the Devil’s trap so carelessly. If he left things as they were, he would finally be seized by that “shag-pate” and have to burn body and soul in the everlasting fires of hell. Then his having forsaken his former religion and having been baptized would be of no avail.</p>
			<p>Since, however, he had sworn in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, he could not break the promise he had made. Of course if <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">St.</abbr> Francis had only been there, something might have been done yet, but unfortunately he was away. Then for three days, during which he could not sleep a wink, he tried to think how to outwit the Devil. To do so, there was absolutely no way but to learn the name of the plant. But where could there be anybody who knew a name unknown even to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">St.</abbr> Francis?</p>
			<p>Finally, on the last night, the cattle dealer, again leading his yellow cow, stole up to the house in which the Brother lived. It stood beside the field facing the road. When he got there, it seemed that the Brother had already gone to bed, and no light shone from the windows. There was a moon, but it was a hazy night, and here and there in the lonely field the purple flowers showed faintly and lonesomely in the gloom. Of course the cattle dealer had finally crept up here because he had thought of a sort of doubtful plan, but as soon as he saw this quiet scene, he was somehow afraid and felt that it might be best to go back home as he was. Especially when he thought of that demon in the house with horns like a goat’s, perhaps dreaming of the Inferno, all the courage he had worked up melted weakly away. But when he thought of handing himself over, body and soul, to that shag-pate, of course it was no time to squeal and give up.</p>
			<p>So the cattle dealer, beseeching the help of the Virgin Mary, boldly carried out the plan he had formed. It was no very great plan. It was only to take off the halter of the yellow cow he was leading and, beating her roundly behind, drive her madly into the field.</p>
			<p>The cow, jumping with the pain, broke down the fence and trampled the field. She ran against the weatherboarding of the house with her horns many times. And the noise of her hoofs and her bellowing, stirred the light mist of the night and echoed fearfully through the neighborhood. Then somebody opened a window shutter and stuck out his head. Because of the darkness the face was not recognizable, but it was surely that of the Devil in the form of the Brother. It may have been nerves, but the horns on his head were distinctly visible even in the night.</p>
			<p>“You dirty cur, you, what do you mean by tearing up my tobacco field?” yelled the Devil in a sleepy voice, shaking his fist. He seemed extremely angry at being disturbed just after falling asleep.</p>
			<p>But to the cattle dealer, who was hiding and watching on the other side of the field, these words of the Devil sounded like the voice of his God.</p>
			<p>“You dirty cur, you, what do you mean by tearing up my tobacco field?”</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>After that everything ended most harmoniously, as always in stories of this kind. The cattle dealer guessed the name “tobacco” successfully and got the best of the Devil. And he took all the tobacco growing in the field. Thus ends the story.</p>
			<p>But I have always wondered whether this tradition may not have in it a deeper meaning. For though the Devil was not able to make the cattle dealer’s body and soul his own, he managed instead to disseminate tobacco throughout all Japan. Wherefore, as the escape of the cattle dealer was coupled with his fall, was not the failure of the Devil accompanied by success? Though the Devil falls, he does not simply rise again. May it not be true that when a man thinks he has won out against temptation he finds to his surprise that he has met defeat?</p>
			<p>And here let me add a brief account of what became of the Devil after that. When <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">St.</abbr> Francis came back, he was finally driven off of the land by the virtue of the holy pentagram. But he seems to have wandered about here and there after that still disguised as a Brother. In a certain record, he is said to have appeared occasionally in Kyōto at about the time of the erection of the temple Nambanji. There is also a theory that Kashin Koji, the notorious fellow who made sport of Matsunaga Danjo, was the Devil, but since this has already been written about by Lafcadio Hearn, I shall not repeat it here. And then when the foreign religion was prohibited by Toyotomi and Tokugawa, he still showed himself at first, but finally in the end he left Japan altogether. The records give practically no further information on the Devil. Only it is exceedingly regrettable that we are unable to learn of his movements since he came back to Japan a second time after the Restoration of Meiji.</p>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
